==============
Vim Cheatsheet
==============

This cheatsheet focuses on the sort of thing you may expect to be able to do in a simple text editor.

The Basics
==========

Moving around
-------------

- Forward one character: **l or Right Arrow**

- Back one character: **h or Left Arrow**

- Up a line: **k or Up Arrow**

- Down a line: **j or DownArrow**

Note: the arrow keys also work in insert mode.

- Move forward to the start of the next word: **w**

- Move to the end of the end of the word: **e**

- Move back to the previous word: **b**

All of these commands can be prefixed by a number, so that *4w* means move forward 4 words, and 7j means go down 7 lines.

- End of the line: **$**

- Start of line: **^**

- End of document: **G**

- Start of document: **gg**

Inserting Text
--------------

The following commands enter INSERT mode with a few minor differences:

- **i**: Enter INSERT mode, and start entering text before the cursor.

- **a**: Enter INSERT mode, and start entering text after the cursor.

- **R**: Enter INSERT mode, and start entering text at the cursor, in "overwrite" mode.

Undo and Redo
-------------

- Undo: **u**

- Redo: **CTRL-r** - (this means hold the control key and press 'r')

Copy and Paste
--------------

Copying text is called yanking in Vim, and consists of the letter 'y' followed by a motion command.

- Yank a word: **yw**

- Yank a line: **yy**

- Yank 5 lines: **5yy**

- Paste contents of register (where things are yanked): **p**

- Yank word to register "a": **"ayw**

- Paste from register "a": **"ap**

- Append word to register "a": **"Ayw**

- List contents of registers: **:reg**

Delete and Change
-----------------

All of the following use d and D to delete things. You can use c and C instead, which deletes and enters INSERT mode.

- Delete a word: **dw**

- Delete a line: **dd**

- Delete 5 lines: **5dd**

- Delete until end of line: **d$** or **D**

Search and Replace
------------------

- Finding a string is a simple matter:

- Search forwards from cursor: **/my string**

- Search backwards from cursor: **?my string**

- Next match in the direction of search: **n**

- Next match in the opposite direction: **N**

- Replacing text looks a bit wierder:

Search for first instance of his in the current line and replace with hers: **:s/his/hers**

- Search file for first instance of his and replace with hers: **:%s/his/hers**

- Search file for all instances of his and replace with hers: **:%s/his/hers/g**

- Search file for all instances of his and replace with hers, confirming each replacement: **:%s/his/hers/gc**

Saving Your Work
----------------

You'll want to save what you are doing once in a while:

- Write the file: **:w**

- Write to a different file: **:w c:/myfolder/myfile.txt**

- Write to a different file that already exists: **:w! c:/myfolder/myfile.txt**

Getting back out of Vim
-----------------------

What? You want to get out? Are you crazy? Oh, OK then...

- Quit: **:q**

- Quit and save: **:x**

- Quit and discard changes: **:q!**



